Created in 2015, Wazuh is an open-source, freely available and extensive EDR solution.
It can be used in all scales of environments. Wazuh operates on a management and agent module.
Simply, a device is dedicated to running Wazuh named a manager, where Wazuh operates on a management
and agent model where the manager is responsible for managing agents installed on the devices you’d like to monitor.


Devices that record the events and processes of a system are called agents.
Agents monitor the processes and events that take place on the device, such as authentication and user management. 
Agents will offload these logs to a designated collector for processing, such as Wazuh.

In order for Wazuh to be populated, agents need to be installed onto devices to log such events. Wazuh can guide you through the agent deployment process provided you fill out some pre-requisites such as::

Operating System
The address of the Wazuh server that the agent should send logs to (this can be a DNS entry or an IP address)
What group the agent will be under - you can sort agents into groups within Wazuh if you wish
This wizard can be launched by navigating to the following location on the Wazuh server: Wazuh -> Agents -> Deploy New Agent 


Wazuh’s Vulnerability Assessment module is a powerful tool that can be used to periodically scan an agent's operating system for installed applications and their version numbers.
Once this information has been gathered, it is sent back to the Wazuh server and compared against a database of CVEs to discover potential vulnerabilities.
For example, the agent in the screenshot below has a version of Vim that is vulnerable to CVE-2019-12735.

Wazuh is capable of auditing and monitoring an agent's configuration whilst proactively recording event logs. When the Wazuh agent is installed,
an audit is performed where a metric is given using multiple frameworks and legislations such as NIST, MITRE and GDPR.

Wazuh utilises the auditd package that can be installed on Wazuh agents running on Debian/Ubuntu and CentOS operating systems. 
In this task, we will be using auditd on a Ubuntu system. Auditd monitors the system for certain actions and events and will write this to a log file.
We can then use the log collector module on a Wazuh agent to read this log file and send it to the Wazuh management server for processing.
First, we will need to install the auditd package and an auditd plugin. This may already be installed on your system; however, 
let’s install it to make sure. Let’s run the command sudo apt-get install auditd audispd-plugins and enable this service to run
currently as well as on boot.sudo systemctl enable auditd.service & sudo systemctl start auditd.service

We will need to configure auditd to create a rule for the commands and events that we wish for it to monitor. In this task,
we will be telling auditd to monitor for any commands executed as root.

You can extend this to monitor commands such as tcpdump, netcat, or catting files such as /etc/passwd, which are all hallmarks of a breach.
Auditd rules arelocated in the following directory: /etc/audit/rules.d/audit.rules. We will be adding our rules manually.
For this task, we will need to open this audit.rules file and append our rule ourselves. First, 
let’s edit the file using sudo nano /etc/audit/rules.d/audit.rules and appending -a exit,always -F arch=64 -F euid=0 -S execve -k audit-wazuh-c
