Task 2The Email Address
It's only appropriate to start this room by mentioning the man who invented the concept of emails and made the @ symbol famous. The person responsible for the contribution to the way we communicate was Ray Tomlinson. 

The invention of the email dates back to the 1970s for ARPANET. Yep, probably before you were born. Definitely, before I was born. :)

So, what makes up an email address?

User Mailbox (or Username)
@
Domain
Let's look at the following email address, billy@johndoe.com.

The user mailbox is billy
@ (thanks Ray)
The domain is johndoe.com

There are 3 specific protocols involved to facilitate the outgoing and incoming email messages, and they are briefly listed below.

SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) - It is utilized to handle the sending of emails. 
POP3 (Post Office Protocol) - Is responsible transferring email between a client and a mail server. 
IMAP (Internet Message Access Protocol) - Is responsible transferring email between a client and a mail server. 
POP3

Emails are downloaded and stored on a single device.
Sent messages are stored on the single device from which the email was sent.
Emails can only be accessed from the single device the emails were downloaded to.
If you want to keep messages on the server, make sure the setting "Keep email on server" is enabled, or all messages are deleted from the server once downloaded to the single device's app or software.
IMAP

Emails are stored on the server and can be downloaded to multiple devices.
Sent messages are stored on the server.
Messages can be synced and accessed across multiple devices.

The Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) is a protocol for receiving email. Protocols standardize technical processes so computers and servers can connect with each other regardless
of whether or not they use the same hardware or software


The Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) is a protocol for receiving email. Protocols standardize technical processes so computers and servers can connect with each other regardless
of whether or not they use the same hardware or software


Spam - unsolicited junk emails sent out in bulk to a large number of recipients. The more malicious variant of Spam is known as MalSpam.
Phishing -  emails sent to a target(s) purporting to be from a trusted entity to lure individuals into providing sensitive information. 
Spear phishing - takes phishing a step further by targeting a specific individual(s) or organization seeking sensitive information.  
Whaling - is similar to spear phishing, but it's targeted specifically to C-Level high-position individuals (CEO, CFO, etc.), and the objective is the same. 
Smishing - takes phishing to mobile devices by targeting mobile users with specially crafted text messages. 
Vishing - is similar to smishing, but instead of using text messages for the social engineering attack, the attacks are based on voice calls. 
